# Ordered Set Informal Proofs

Informal proofs from Chapter 1 of Davey-Priestly's Introduction to Lattices.

### Exercise 1.7
> Let $P$ and $Q$ be ordered sets. Prove that $(a_1, b_1) \lessdot (a_2, b_2)$ in $P × Q$ if and only if $(a_1 = a_2 \ \text{  \&  }\ b_1 \lessdot b_2)$ or $(a_1 \lessdot a_2 \ \text{\&} \ b_1 = b_2).$

*Proof*: 

"$\Rightarrow$": Assume $(a_1, b_1) \lessdot (a_2, b_2)$. We must show that $(a_1=a_2 \ \text{ \& } \ b_1 \lessdot b_2)$ or $(a_1 \lessdot a_2 \ \text{ \& } \ b_1=b_2)$. By definition of $\lessdot$ and lexicographical order, $(a_1, b_1) \lt (a_2, b_2)$ implies $(a_1 \le a_2 \ \text{ \& } \ b_1 \le b_2)$. Since $(a_1 = a_2 \ \text{ \& } \ b_1 = b_2)$ cannot be true by definition of $\lt$, we can say $(a_1 \lt a_2 \ \text{ \& } \ b_1 \le b_2)$ or $(a_1 \le a_2 \ \text{ \& } \ b_1 \lt b_2)$. $(a_1 \lt a_2 \ \text{ \& } \ b_1 \lt b_2)$ violates the definition of $\lessdot$, so we have $(a_1 = a_2 \ \text{  \&  }\ b_1 \lt b_2)$ or $(a_1 \lt a_2 \ \text{\&} \ b_1 = b_2)$. Replacing $\lt$ with $\lessdot$ gives us $(a_1 = a_2 \ \text{  \&  }\ b_1 \lessdot b_2)$ or $(a_1 \lessdot a_2 \ \text{\&} \ b_1 = b_2)$

"$\Leftarrow$": Assume $(a_1 = a_2 \ \text{  \&  }\ b_1 \lessdot b_2)$ or $(a_1 \lessdot a_2 \ \text{\&} \ b_1 = b_2)$. We must show that $(a_1, b_1) \lessdot (a_2, b_2)$ in $P × Q$. Take $(a_1 = a_2 \ \text{ \& } \ b_1 \lessdot b_2)$. Suppose there is a pair, $(z_1, z_2)$ s.t. $(a_1, b_1) \lt (z_1, z_2) \lt (a_2, b_2)$. Since $a_1 = a_2$, $a_1 = z_1 = a_2$ and $b_1 \lt z_2 \lt b_2$. However, since $b_1 \lessdot b_2$, there cannot be an element $z_2$ with $b_1 \lt z_2 \lt b_2$ and so $(z_1, z_2)$ cannot exist and $(a_1, b_1) \lessdot (a_2, b_2)$. The same follows for $(a_1 \lessdot a_2 \ \text{ \& } \ b_1 = b_2)$.  $\square$


### Exercise 1.24(i)
> Let $P$ and $Q$ be ordered sets. Show that $\psi : P \to Q$ is order-preserving if and only if $\psi^{-1}(A)$ is a downset in $P$ whenever $A$ is a downset in $Q$.

*Proof:*

"$\Rightarrow$": Assume $\psi : P \to Q$ is order preserving. We must show that $\psi^{-1}(A)$ is a downset in P whenever $A$ is a downset in $Q$. Let $x \in \psi^{-1}(A)$ and $y \in P$ such that $y \leq_{P} x$. By definition of the inverse image, if $x \in \psi^{-1}(A)$ then $\psi(x) \in A$. Since $\psi$ is order-preserving, $y \leq_{P} x$ implies $\psi(y) \leq_{Q} \psi(x)$. Because $A$ is a downset in $Q$ and $\psi(x) \in A$, and $\psi(y) \leq_{Q} \psi(x)$, $phi(y) \in A$ and (by definition of inverse image) $y \in \psi^{-1}(A)$. Thus, $\psi^{-1}(A) is a downset in $P$ whenever $A$ is a downset in $Q$. 

"$\Leftarrow$": Assume that $\psi^{-1}(A)$ is a down-set in $P$ whenever $A$ is a down-set in $Q$. We must show that $\psi: P \to Q$ is order-preserving. Let $x, y \in P$ such that $x \leq_{P} y$. We must show that $\psi(x) \leq_{Q} \psi(y)$. Consider the principal down-set generated by $\psi(y)$ in $Q$: A = $\downarrow\psi(y) = \{q \in Q \ | \ q \leq_{Q} y \}$. Thus, $A$ is a down-set in $Q$, and $\psi^{-1}(A)$ is a down-set in $P$ (given by our assumption). Since $y \in \psi^{-1}(A)$, $\psi^{-1}(A)$ is a down-set, and $x \leq_{P} y$, $x \in \psi^{-1}(A)$ and $\psi(x) \in A$. By definition of $A$, $\psi(x) \leq_{Q} \psi(y)$ and so $\psi$ is order-preserving. $\square$

### Exercise 1.24(ii)
> Let $P$ and $Q$ be ordered sets. Assume $\psi : P \to Q$ is order-preserving. Then, by (i), the map $\psi^{-1} : \mathcal{O}(Q) \to \mathcal{O}(P)$ is well-defined.
>> (a) Show tht $\psi$ is an order-embedding if and only if $\psi^{-1}$ maps $\mathcal{O}(Q)$ onto $\mathcal{O}(P)$.
>>
*Proof:* 

"$\Rightarrow$": Assume $\psi$ is an order-embedding. We must show that $\psi^{-1}$ maps $\mathcal{O}(Q)$ onto $\mathcal{O}(P)$. That is, we must show that for any down-set $B \in \mathcal{O}(P)$, there exists a down-set $A \in \mathcal{O}(Q)$ such that $\psi^{-1}(A) = B$. Let $B \in \mathcal{O}(P)$. Define $A \subseteq Q$ 

... todo ...

>
>> (b) Show that $\psi$ maps onto $Q$ if and only if the map $\psi^{-1} : \mathcal{O}(Q) \to \mathcal{O}(P)$ is one-to-one.

... todo ...

### Exercise 1.26

> Prove that, for all ordered sets $P$, $Q$, and $R$, $\langle P \to \langle Q \to R \rangle \rangle \cong \langle P \times Q \to R \rangle$.

*Proof:*

1. Define the forward mapping: $\phi : \langle P \to \langle Q \to R \rangle \rangle \to \langle P \times Q \to R \rangle$ and $f :  \langle P \to \langle Q \to R \rangle \rangle$.

    So, $\phi(f)(p,q) := f(p)(q)$ (uncurrying)


2. Show $\phi(f)$ is monotone: We must show that $(p_1, q_1) \leq (p_2, q_2) \implies \phi(f)(p_1, q_1) \leq \phi(f)(p_2, q_2)$. 

    Assume $(p_1, q_1) \leq (p_2, q_2)$, then $p_1 \leq p_2$ and $q_1 \leq q_2$. Since $f$ is monotone, $p_1 \leq p_2 \implies f(p_1) \leq f(p_2)$ and $f(p_1)(q) \leq f(p_2)(q) \text{ for all } q$. 
    
    Since $f(p_2)$ is monotone, $f(p_2)$, $q_1 \leq q_2 \implies f(p_2)(q_1) \leq f(p_2)(q_1)$. Thus, we have $f(p_1)(q_1) \leq f(p_2)(q_1) \leq f(p_2)(q_2)$ and so $f(p_1)(q_1) \leq f(p_2)(q_2)$. 

    By definition of $\phi(f)$, we have $(p_1, q_1) \leq (p_2, q_2) \implies \phi(f)(p_1, q_1) \leq \phi(f)(p_2, q_2)$. So $\phi(f)$ is monotone.

3. Define the inverse mapping: $\psi : \langle P \times Q \to R \rangle \to \langle P \to \langle Q \to R \rangle \rangle$ and $g : \langle P \times Q \to R \langle$.

    So, $\psi(g)(p)(q) := g(p,q)$ (currying)

4. Show $\psi(g)$ is monotone: We must show that $p_1 \leq p_2 \implies \psi(g)(p_1) \leq \psi(g)(p_2)$ (and, more generaly, $\psi(g)(p_1)(q) \leq \psi(p_2)(q) \text{ for all } q$). 

    Assume $p_1 \leq p_2$ Since $g$ is monotone, $p_1 \leq p_2 \implies g(p_1, q) \leq g(p_2, g) \text{ for all } q$. 

    Rewriting given the definition of $\psi(g)$, we have $\psi(g)(p_1)(q) \leq \psi(g)(p_2)(q)$. So $\psi(g)(p_1) \leq \psi(g)(p_2)$, and $\psi(g)$ is monotone. 

5. Show identity can be obtained from inverse: $\psi(\phi(f)) = f$ and $\phi(\psi(g)) = g$

    ...

6. ...

